Generating Bibliographies with biblatex and biber

This will only be a short overview of the main and most often
used features. More detailed information can be found in the
package documentation.


=== The database ===

Creating a bibliography using biblatex and biber means storing
''all'' of your available bibliographic information in a simple
text-based database. The name should be as unique as possible,
for example <code>lauraPhd2016.bib</code>. This is helpful when
transferring files with your advisor, students or colleagues.
biber is used to deal with the database.

A sample database file could look like this:
<syntaxhighlight lang="latex">
@article{wombat2016,
	author   = {Walther Wombat and Klaus Koala},
	title    = {The true meaning of 42},
	journal  = {Journal of modern skepticism},
	date     = {2016},
	keywords = {trusted},
}
@book{lion2010,
	author       = {Laura Lion and  Gabrielle Giraffe and Carl Capybara},
	title        = {The dangers of asking the wrong question},
	publisher    = {publishing house},
	date         = {2010},
	keywords     = {trusted},
}
@online{wikibook,
	title        = {Generating Bibliographies with biblatex and biber},
	organization = {Wikibooks},
	date         = {2016},
	urldate      = {2016-03-07},
	url          = {https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/LaTeX/Generating_Bibliographies_with_biblatex_and_biber},
	keywords     = {untrusted},
}
</syntaxhighlight>

Every entry in the database starts with an <code>@</code>-sign
followed by the entry type. More types are available, the package
documentation lists all of them. The bibliographic information
for each entry are stored in a pair of braces, beginning with a
unique keyword for that entry (bibkey). Least complicated way of
presenting the data is every field type in a new line, the
content in curly braces, followed by a comma. The order in which
you give the information is not important.

Please have a close look at the authors, every individual author
is separated by the keyword <code>and</code>. All dates are
written in YYYY-MM-DD, or just the year if the other information
are not available. The file <code>biblatex-examples.bib</code>
which should have been installed with the package contains some
sample entries.

=== Setting up biber ===

Biber is the name of the helper program that sorts the entries
and provides all the relevant information to package biblatex. If
you are not comfortable using the command line (aka the
terminal), you should set up your editor to do it for you.
[http://tex.stackexchange.com/questions/154751/biblatex-with-biber-configuring-my-editor-to-avoid-undefined-citations|Setting
up my editor to use biber] shows how to do it for the different
editors.


=== A simple example ===
{{LaTeX/Example|code=
\documentclass{article}
\usepackage[backend=biber]{biblatex}
\addbibresource{lauraPhd2016.bib}
\begin{document}
I doubt that there is any useful information here~\cite{wikibook}.

All we know is limited, apart from knowing the answer we all know. Or do we? Wombat and Koala have discovered some interesting things~\cite{wombat2016}.

Some people are too nosy. What can happen to them is described by Laura Lion~\cite[9]{lion2010}.

\printbibliography
\end{document}|
}}

Now how does it actually work? Package biblatex is loaded with
the option <code>backend=biber</code> followed by adding your
database file to the list of bibliographic files using
<code>\addbibresource</code>. Please note that the file extension
is mandatory and that this is happening in the preamble of the
document. 

Within the document you can cite one of your database entries
using <code>\cite{bibkey}</code>. Your database can contain
hundreds of entries, but only cited references will occur in the
final list. You can use <code>\nocite{<bibkey>}</code> to add
uncited entries to the list. If you want to add ''all'' entries
from the database use <code>\nocite{*}</code>.

Finally, the list of your references is printed with
<code>\printbibliography</code>. 

Running LaTeX (no matter if <code>latex</code>,
<code>pdflatex</code> etc.) on the main document  will result in
<code>undefined references</code>, the following screenshot, no
bibliography and instead of proper citations, just the bibkey
printed in bold.  

[[iblatexMissingBiber]]

In order to really get a bibliography and the citations, and not
just the infamous <code>There were undefined reference</code>
warning, you have to run biber after latex to extract the
relevant data from the database. After setting up biber as
described in [[LINK ME LINK ME]] you should be able to do it by
pressing one button while working on your document. To
incorporate the bibliography information into your document,
LaTeX then has to process the data biber has generated before.
To sum it up, if you have a file
<code>lauraPhd2016Main.tex</code> you (or your editor) will have to
do:

* latex lauraPhdd2016Main
* biber lauraPhdd2016Main
* latex lauraPhdd2016Main

Everytime your database is updated, remember to process the
database by calling biber.

The full result can be seen in the picture below. Please note
that package biblatex adds some small little details. Can you see
things that are printed but have not been defined?

[[biblatexRefA]]

== Reference  Styles ==

Different reference styles are in use within the different
disciplines of science. Very broadly speaking, you can divide
into a numerical referencing sytem (Vancouver) or an author date
referencing system (Harvard). 


%[http://ctan.org/topic/biblatex CTAN]. 
%Package biblatex provides
%different citation commands that generate different output
%(in-text citation, footnotes and more). A few examples are given
%below, the package documentation contains and explains the use of
%the whole set. 


=== Numerical Referencing ===

Numerical referencing is the default style. Numbers within
brackets are used in text and in the bibliography. Using
<code>\autocite</code> makes it easy to change the style into
footnotes. <code>sorting=none</code> gives a bibliography that is
sorted chronologically, i.e. the numbers increase to the end of
the document.

{{LaTeX/Usage|code=
\documentclass{article}
\usepackage{xcolor}
\pagecolor{yellow!20!white}
\usepackage[backend=biber,style=numeric,autocite=plain,sorting=none]{biblatex}
\addbibresource{lauraPhd2016.bib}
\begin{document}
I doubt that there is any useful information here.~\cite{wikibook}

All we know is limited, apart from knowing the answer we all
know. Or do we? Wombat and Koala have discovered some interesting
things.~\autocite[compare][80]{wombat2016}

What can happen to nosy people is described by \textcite[9]{lion2010}.
\printbibliography
\end{document}|
rendering=[[biblatexNumericRegular]]
}}

Using <code>autocite=footnote</code> gives a diffferent output.
Can you spot all the differences? 


[[biblatexNumericFootnote]]

=== Author Date Referencing ===

If you want an author-date referencing style, you can use
<code>style=authoryear</code> when loading biblatex. The option
<code>autocite</code> with the option <code>inline</code> puts
parenthesis around the cite genererated with
<code>autocite</code> (which is similar to using
<code>\parencite</code>. In some cases, <code>\textcite</code>
may come in handy when the citation is the subject and part of
the sentence flow. 

{{LaTeX/Usage|code=
\documentclass{article}
\usepackage[backend=biber,style=authoryear,autocite=inline]{biblatex}
\addbibresource{lauraPhd2016.bib}
\begin{document}
I doubt that there is any useful information here~\cite{wikibook}.

All we know is limited, apart from knowing the answer we all know. Or do we?~\cite{wombat2016}

Some people are too nosy. What can happen to them is described by Laura Lion~\autocite[9]{lion2010}.

Some people are too nosy. What can happen to them is described by \textcite[9]{lion2010}.

\printbibliography
\end{document}|
render=[[add something here]]
}}


=== APA Citing ===

The American Psychological Association (APA) defines a very
strict author year style. You can access it using
<code>style=apa</code> and additionally defining the language
mapping. 

{{LaTeX/Usage|code=
\usepackage[backend=biber,style=apa,autocite=inline]{biblatex}
\DeclareLanguageMapping{english}{english-apa}
\addbibresource{lauraPhd2016.bib}|
render=[[biblatexApa|500px]]
}}

Compare the output with the normal author year style. How many
changes can you spot? 


== Separate Bibliographies by Entry Type ==

Suppose you want to have a separate bibliography for all the
online resources you are citing. No problem using the optional
argument of <code>\printbibliography</code>. You can also change
the title (and other stuff).
{{LaTeX/Usage|code=
\documentclass{article}
\usepackage[backend=biber,defernumbers=true]{biblatex}
\addbibresource{biblatex-examples.bib}
\begin{document}
\nocite{westfahl:space,aristotle:physics,ctan,baez/online,markey,sigfridsson}
\printbibliography[type=online,title={All my online references}]
\printbibliography[nottype=online,title={All my non-online references}]
\end{document}|
render=[[get me an image here]]
}}

== Splitting into different topics ==

You can split your bibliography into differet topics, in trusted
and untrusted sources, or in primary and secondary  sources. The
way to tell biblatex what is what, is by adding a
<code>keywords</code> tag to the entries of the database.

<syntaxhighlight lang="latex">
@book{lion2010,
	author       = {Laura Lion and  Gabrielle Giraffe and Carl Capybara},
	title        = {The dangers of asking the wrong question},
	publisher    = {publishing house},
	date         = {2010},
	keywords     = {trusted},
}
</syntaxhighlight>

{{LaTeX/Usage|code=
\documentclass{article}
\usepackage[backend=biber,style=authoryear,refsection=section]{biblatex}
\addbibresource{lauraPhd2016.bib}
\begin{document}
\cites[see also][12]{wombat2016}[and][45]{lion2010}
\nocite{wikibook}
\printbibliography[keyword={trusted},title={All the trusted sources}]
\printbibliography[keyword={untrusted},title={All the untrusted sources}]
\end{document}|
render=[[biblatexMultiTopic]]
}}

Note, that the entryfield in the dataase is called
<code>keywords</code> (plural) because you can have more than oe
keyword (separated by commas). When calling the
<code>\printbibliography</code> command, you have to use the
singular. biblatex has a powerful system of filtering data, more
can e found in the manual.

== Bibliographies per Section or Chapter ==

Some people have the need for a reference list at the end of each
chapter or section. This can be done using
<code>refsection</code>.

{{LaTeX/Usage|code=
\documentclass{article}
\usepackage[backend=biber,defernumbers=true,refsection=section]{biblatex}
\addbibresource{biblatex-examples.bib}
\begin{document}
\section{Aster}
\cite{ctan,sigfridsson} and some text
\printbibliography[heading=subbibliography]
\section{Begonia}
\cite{aristotle:physics,markey}
\printbibliography[heading=subbibliography]
\section{Cichorium}
\cite{westfahl:space,baez/online}
\printbibliography[heading=subbibliography]
\end{document}|
render=[[biblatexMultiSection]]
}}
